[sample] RETRO REVIEW: Breaking Bad Is a Stunning Examination of Justification for Evil

One of the strongest testaments to the writing and filmmaking of Vince Gilligan and those who worked with him on Breaking Bad is how often viewers forgot that Walter White was evil.
The title comes from an expression, not used much in slang but often used in writing, to describe a character's journey to villainy.
Yet, revisiting the series, it becomes clear that Walter White always had genuine darkness in him.
Breaking Bad was AMC's second serious effort to rebrand itself from American Movie Classics into a purveyor of Prestige TV.
The series remains a brilliantly crafted, well-executed TV show with compelling stories and just enough unreality to keep viewers along for the ride.
Breaking Bad is about the banality of evil and the lengths people will go to protect their lives or their cash or, in Walt's case, his reputation.
While many will happily declare Breaking Bad one of the finest TV series ever, the first two seasons were a drag for some viewers to get through, with the show not really catching on until it "got good."
Yet Gilligan and company knew their characters immediately, and they weren't afraid to let them "break bad" slowly.
Like James Gandolfini as Tony Soprano, Bryan Cranston was able to evoke sympathy from viewers through his performance.
When facing off against the cartel or Gus Fring, viewers could root for Walt and not feel bad about it.
Walter was so effective at lying (even to himself) that viewers could miss the abuse he leveled at Skyler.
Every time Walt appealed to Jesse Pinkman, Mike Ehrmantraut or any character, Cranston was able to sell it so viewers believed him.
He wasn't really a "bad guy" -- he was just trying to make money for his family.
But, as he said in the series finale, being Heisenberg was the only time he felt truly "alive."
Breaking Bad is a meticulous examination of his unique brand of evil -- and there's still plenty to enjoy about the series, from its outstanding performances to its bone-chilling, nail-biting narrative.

By Joshua M. Patton
Published Apr 27, 2024
